[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
dan walker and louise mentioned
it's just gone eight o'clock these are
the headlines this morning
we did what we came here to do
and so much more
donald trump's turbulent four years as
u.s president draw to a close
to heal we must remember
it's hard sometimes to remember
but that's how we heal it's important
to do that as a nation his successor joe
biden speaks of the
need to heal the nation as he prepares
to be sworn in
the former prime minister theresa may
has accused boris johnson of abandoning
britain's position of global moral
leadership a volatile situation flood
warnings
rise as storm kristoff gives parts of
the uk an
overnight drenching and there could be
another 18 hours worth of rain to fall
in some areas river levels will continue
to rise after that
add on to that we've got also the
problem with snow heading our way to
eastern parts of scotland i'll have
all the details good morning could
forgotten freelancers
finally be brought into government
support schemes cobia emergency measures
face heavy criticism
the tax office is told you have six
weeks to change
[Music]
good morning it's wednesday it's the
20th of january and after a
controversial four years donald trump's
presidency comes to an end later today
with the inauguration of that man there
the 46th president
joe biden on the eve of his inauguration
mr biden spoke of the need for the
nation to heal
as he led a memorial ceremony paying
tribute to the 400 000 americans who've
died with covert 19.
here's our washington correspondent
nomia iqbal
[Music]
church bells rang out from the national
cathedral
to remember the victims of covid19
reflecting pool at the national mall was
lit up for the 400
000 people who have lost their lives
democrats held a memorial at capitol
hill
where the inauguration ceremony will
take place later
the victims were honored across the
country and by the incoming leadership
of america between sundown and dusk
let us shine the lights in the darkness
along the sacred pool of reflection
remember all whom we lost tonight
we grieve and begin healing
together though we may be physically
separated
we the american people are united
in spirit then a touching tribute from a
nurse
who works on the front line
grace
how sweet
the sound
at exactly 12 p.m eastern time donald
trump
will become a civilian and joe biden the
president
but this is an inauguration like no
other
there won't be crowds watching because
of the pandemic and the large military
presence
here means that things are even more
restricted
among the crowds will be representatives
from many different countries
including the uk i think this is going
to be a very warm
relationship it is built on a very solid
bedrock
of all the things that make the
relationship important and special
deep profound successful cooperation on
defense security intelligence
and increasingly uh on the economy on
science
and on prosperity president trump won't
be there though
but had this to say to his successors we
extend our best wishes
and we also want them to have luck a
very
important word it wasn't entirely a
goodbye
i want you to know that the movement we
started
is only just beginning there's never
been anything
like it under the constitution mr trump
can run for office again
but he's facing another impeachment
trial and he's also losing the support
of some top republicans
following the deadly riots on capitol
hill the mob
was fed lies they were provoked
by the president and other powerful
people
and they tried to use fear and violence
to stop a specific proceeding of the
first branch of the federal government
which they did not like america under
president trump
has been stormy and spellbinding four
years on
joe biden hopes under him this country
can be calm and still normal bbc news
washington
well nomi is in washington for us this
morning ahead of that inauguration
ceremony and
nami we can see behind you some of that
security cordon uh we've been hearing a
lot about that in the last 24 hours or
so just run us through exactly what will
be happening today
yeah security is tight it always is
ahead of any
inauguration and there are up to 23 000
troops from the national guard here to
make sure that everything goes to plan
following those deadly riots that
happened on capitol hill earlier
this month the inauguration ceremony
itself is pretty
straightforward or it should be the the
timings are very specific
the only really crucial time people need
to know about
is 12 p.m my time eastern time which is
5 p.m uk time because it's in the
constitution it's at that point that joe
biden becomes
the next president of the us and with
him he takes
his first first-ever female vice
president kamala harris
also the first uh black and uh south
asian
uh female sorry vice president as well
so it's a really historic moment that's
happening but president trump is still
in power for the for this morning and
he's issued a series of pardons about 73
pardons this is where
convicted criminals and uh those facing
trial are effectively cleared of their
sentence and on top of that list
is steve bannon his former chief
strategist a very controversial figure
he was facing fraud charges linked to a
fundraising campaign
for donald trump's u.s mexico wall and
it will just open up donald trump to
more criticisms
that he's been using his presidential
power to help his friends but
it is a power that is available to him
and he will be using it like all
presidents have
in the final hours before he leaves the
city
nomi thank you very much for that and um
we were speaking when we earlier to some
other guests and we were saying that as
nominee was mentioning there's something
that all presidents do and probably the
most famous one was back in the 1970s
where
gerald ford was the man who pardoned
richard nixon so it's it's
long been a tradition um also just of
course there'll be full coverage of all
of that on the bbc news channel
throughout the day
of theresa may is accused boris johnson
of abandoning the uk's moral
leadership on the world stage the former
prime minister said
threatening to break international law
during the brexit negotiations and
cutting overseas aid
reduced the uk's global credibility
let's get more from our political
correspondent adam fleming who joins us
from westminster so just give us a bit
of analysis on what she said morning
hello there so this is quite a broad
attack by theresa may on
unnamed politicians all around the world
she's criticizing what she calls the
strong men
who put their own personalities ahead of
the problems that they're meant to be
solving together and in terms of
specific criticisms of the uk government
she says it was that threat to override
part of the brexit deal in the heat of
the negotiations
last year and also the decision to
reprioritize some spending away from
foreign aid
on to covet spending at home that has
affected
the uk's reputation globally she's made
these criticisms before
quite often she's getting a little
digging at the government when she
stands up in the house of commons
but packaging it all up in this way on
this day uh
is in the words of one of her former
very close advisors quite
punchy the government instead would like
to focus on this
new relationship they're going to forge
with the new president when he takes
over in the next couple of hours
where they feel they've got quite a lot
in common when it comes to
working together on the world stage
fighting climate change
cooperating on global security and that
is what the home secretary pretty patel
wanted to focus on when she was speaking
to breakfast earlier
the prime minister and president-elect
biden have already been in touch
they've already spoken they've had
discussions about
you know leading the world on many of
the shared challenges that we all face
we
face these as two strong healthy
democracies
to global leaders when it comes to
international values our place in the
world
how we work bilaterally multilateral
institutions
that is going to continue that'll go
from strength to strength
although diplomats here in the uk think
that joe biden will be concentrating on
on domestic issues
for his first few months before he
starts to think about the rest of the
world
and on international aid they say even
with it being cut by a little bit
the uk is still a leader in helping
poorer countries around the world adam
fleming thank you as ever
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news